specs: Honest Challenger specs (#7184)
ethereum-optimism/optimism: specs/honest-challenger-fdg.md

of the FDG being interacted with to generate the traces needed to make truthful claims.

## FDG Responses

### Root Claims

When a `FaultDisputeGame` is created, the honest challenger has two possible correct responses
to its root claim:

1. [**Attack**](./fault-dispute-game.md#attack) if they disagree with the root claim.
The root claim commits to the entire execution trace, so the first move here is to
attack with the [ClaimHash](./fault-dispute-game.md#claims) at the midpoint
instruction within their execution trace.
2. **Do Nothing** if they agree with the root claim. They do nothing because if the root
claim is left un-countered, the game resolves to their agreement.
NOTE: The honest challenger will still track this game in order to defend any subsequent
claims made against the root claim - in effect, "playing the game".

### Counter Claims

When a new claim is made in a dispute game with a [game tree](./fault-dispute-game.md#game-tree)
depth in the range of `[1, MAX_DEPTH]`, the honest challenger processes it and performs
a response. If multiple claims are observed since the last sync,

> the honest challenger responds to them in chronological order.

Reviewer: chronological order appears to be an over specification (unless it is somehow critical to resolution working correctly)

Author: good point. The ordering doesn't matter. Fixed.

# Honest Challenger (Fault Dispute Game)

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**

- [Overview](#overview)
- [L2OutputOracle Responses](#l2outputoracle-responses)
- [FDG Responses](#fdg-responses)
  - [Root Claims](#root-claims)
  - [Counter Claims](#counter-claims)
  - [Steps](#steps)
- [Resolution](#resolution)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

The honest challenger is an agent interacting in the [Fault Dispute Game](./fault-dispute-game.md)
(FDG) that supports honest claims and disputes false claims.
An honest challenger strives to ensure a correct, truthful, game resolution.
The honest challenger is also _rational_ as any deviation from its behavior will result in
negative outcomes.
This document specifies the expected behavior of an honest challenger.

## Overview

The Honest Challenger has two primary duties:

> 1. Challenge invalid outputs by either creating new FDGs or supporting existing ones that

Reviewer 2: Not sure if we need to note that in the alpha op-challenger won't create new FDGs, and in the final design for fault proofs a new FDG is created to propose an output root so that won't be a responsibility of the honest challenger.

Reviewer 3: Agree with this. I think the honest challenger has a primary, overarching goal to engage in fault dispute games, challenging invalid root claims and defending valid ones (or some variant of this wording). Keep it simple where possible

Author: Makes sense. I'll rewrite this.

aim to delete such outputs.
2. Contest root claims in FDGs that seek to remove valid outputs.

> The honest challenger monitors the `L2OutputOracle` to identify invalid proposals and scans
> the `DisputeGameFactory` contract to find on-going FDGs.

Reviewer 3: If the former is corrected this should change to something like the following
```suggestion
The honest challenger polls the `DisputeGameFactory` contract for new and on-going Fault Dispute Games.
```

trusted rollup node as well as a trace provider (ex: [Cannon](./cannon-fault-proof-vm.md)).
The trace provider must be configured with the [ABSOLUTE_PRESTATE](./fault-dispute-game.md#execution-trace)
of the FDG being interacted with to generate the traces needed to make truthful claims.

## L2OutputOracle Responses

When a new output is proposed to the `L2OutputOracle`, the honest challenger has a binary decision to make:

1. If the trusted node agrees with the output, take no action. A `FaultDisputeGame` is
designed to prove that a proposed output root is incorrect and consequently, to delete it.
Therefore, an honest challenger will not create a dispute game that challenges an output
root that its trusted node agrees with.
2. If the trusted node disagrees, create a new `FaultDisputeGame` via the `DisputeGameFactory`.
In contrast to the above, an honest challenger aims to delete any output roots that its trusted
node disagrees with in order to claim the bond attached to it.
The honest challenger assumes that their rollup node is synced to the canonical state and that
the fault proof program is correct, so it is willing to put its money on the line to counter

> any faults.

Reviewer 3: This can probably all be removed if the game creation is to happen in another module or called something different than the "honest challenger".

## FDG Responses

### Root Claims

When a `FaultDisputeGame` is created, the honest challenger has two possible correct responses
to its root claim:

1. [**Attack**](./fault-dispute-game.md#attack) if they disagree with the root claim.
When an honest challenger disagrees with a root claim of a game,
it is akin to them agreeing with the output proposal that the game is attempting to delete.
The root claim commits to the entire execution trace, so the first move by a defender of the
output root is to attack with the [ClaimHash](./fault-dispute-game.md#claims) at the midpoint
instruction within their execution trace.
2. **Do Nothing** if they agree with the root claim. If an honest challenger agrees with a
root claim of a game, it means that they disagree with the output root it is trying to delete.
They do nothing because if the root claim is left un-countered, the game will delete the output

> root they disagree with.

Reviewer 3: I would just add here something to the effect of:
```suggestion
root they disagree with. NOTE: The honest challenger will still track this game in order to defend any subsequent claims made against the root claim - in effect, "playing the game".
```

### Counter Claims

When a new claim is made in a dispute game with a [game tree](./fault-dispute-game.md#game-tree)
depth in the range of `[1, MAX_DEPTH]`, the honest challenger processes it and performs
a response. If multiple claims are observed since the last sync,
the honest challenger responds to them in chronological order.

To determine the appropriate response, the challenger first needs to know which
[_team_](./fault-dispute-game.md#team-dynamics) it belongs to.
This determines the set of claims it should respond to in the FDG.
If the agent determines itself to be a Defender, aiming to delete an output root,

>  then it must dispute claims positioned at odd depths in the game tree.

Reviewer 3: nit
```suggestion
then it must dispute claims positioned at odd depths in the game tree.
```

Otherwise, it disputes claims positioned at even depths in the game tree.
This means an honest challenger will only respond to claims made by the opposing team.

The next step is to determine whether the claim has a valid commitment (i.e. `ClaimHash`).
If the `ClaimHash` matches ours at the same trace index, then we disagree with the claim's
stance by moving to [defend](./fault-dispute-game.md#defend).
Otherwise, the claim is [attacked](./fault-dispute-game.md#attack).

The following pseudocode illustrates the response logic.

```python
class Team(Enum):
    DEFENDER = 0
    CHALLENGER = 1

class Claim:
    position: uint64
    claim_hash: ClaimHash

MAX_TRACE = 2**MAX_GAME_DEPTH

def respond(claim: Claim, chal: Team, chal_trace: List[ClaimHash, MAX_TRACE]):
    if depth(claim.position) % 2 != chal.value:
        if chal_trace[trace_index(claim.position)] == claim.claim_hash:
            defend()
        else:
            attack()
    else: pass # no response
```

In attack or defense, the honest challenger MUST submit a `ClaimHash` corresponding to the state

> identified by the trace index of their response position.

Reviewer 3: I think we don't need to stress this here since we state initially that the doc details the expected behavior of the challenger. So we can just write what the honest challenger (a concept) does.
```suggestion
In attack or defense, the honest challenger submits a `ClaimHash` corresponding to the state
identified by the trace index of their response position.
```

> The honest challenger SHOULD respond to claims as soon as possible to avoid the clock of its
> counter-claim from expiring.

Reviewer 3: ibid
```suggestion
The honest challenger responds to claims as soon as possible to avoid the clock of its
counter-claim from expiring.
```

### Steps

At the max depth of the game, claims represent commitments to the state of the fault proof VM
at a single instruction step interval.
Because the game can no longer bisect further, when the honest challenger has a valid move
against these claims (valid defined by the response in [Counter Claims](#counter-claims)),

> the only option for an honest challenger is to execute a VM step on-chain to disprove the claim
> at `MAX_GAME_DEPTH`.

Reviewer 3: nit
```suggestion
the only option is to execute a VM step on-chain to disprove the claim at `MAX_GAME_DEPTH`.
```

> If the VM step proves this claim correct, the claim will be left uncountered.

Reviewer 3: I don't think it's very intuitive what this means. What do you think about explicitly write what leaving a claim uncountered means with respect to the state of the fault proof VM since that's how the section started?
For example
> Since the claim commits to a single instruction, it's correct execution and leaving it uncountered means that this bisection failed to disprove the root claim.

Author: The meaning of uncountered (or rather `countered` since uncountered isn't a word) is explained in the [FDG specs](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/develop/specs/fault-dispute-game.md#step-types). Though I think this sentence is redundant given the context so I've removed it.

> The same rules for determining whether a move is an attack, defense, or noop from the above

Reviewer 3: I think this section has a fair amount of repetition to the one above - it might make sense to combine them so as to articulate from the outset that calling `attack` or `defend` won't work and the challenger should issue the step (with the hyperlink)

Author: Will reword. I wanted to highlight that determining a challenger's  _stance_ (attack or defense, but not the moves) works the same way for steps and moves. We don't have existing verbiage for this kind of thing. Since we overload `attack` and `defense` in multiple contexts.

Reviewer 3: Ah understood, that makes sense to me!

 section apply to claims at the bottom level of the tree.
 Instead of calling `attack` or `defend`, the challenger issues a [step](./fault-dispute-game.md#step).
 An honest challenger will issue an attack step if it disagrees with the claim,

>  otherwise a defense step is issued.

Reviewer 2: Might be worth mentioning the need to populate the pre-image oracle with any required data prior to calling step.

Author: This was missing in the original fdg specs. Added it there in its step section.

>  section apply to claims at the bottom level of the tree.
>  Instead of calling `attack` or `defend`, the challenger issues a [step](./fault-dispute-game.md#step).
>  An honest challenger will issue an attack step if it disagrees with the claim,
>  otherwise a defense step is issued.

Reviewer 3: nit
```suggestion
section apply to claims at the bottom level of the tree.
Instead of calling `attack` or `defend`, the challenger issues a [step](./fault-dispute-game.md#step).
An honest challenger will issue an attack step if it disagrees with the claim,
otherwise a defense step is issued.
```

## Resolution

> When one side of a `FaultDisputeGame`'s chess clock runs out, the honest challenger’s responsibility
> is to resolve the game.
> This action entails the challenger calling the `resolve` function on the `FaultDisputeGame` contract.

Reviewer 3: nit
```suggestion
When the [chess clock](./fault-dispute-game.md#game-clock) of a `FaultDisputeGame` team runs out, the game can be resolved.
The honest challenger does this by calling the `resolve` function on the `FaultDisputeGame` contract.
```

The `FaultDisputeGame` does not put a time cap on resolution - because of the liveness assumption
on honest challengers and the bonds attached to the claims they’ve countered,
challengers should resolve the game promptly in order to make their funds

> liquid again and capture their reward(s).

Reviewer 3: I think we can keep it simple here and just say something like
```suggestion
challengers are economically incentivized to resolve the game promptly to capture the bonds.
```
